version 1.4.0 released (#234)
nim-lang/website: jekyll/_posts/2020-10-16-version-140-released.md

---
title: "Version 1.4.0 released"
author: The Nim Team
---

We are very proud to announce Nim version 1.4 after six months of continuous development!

> Other than version 1.0, this is probably the biggest Nim release yet and we're very excited to have it released!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Other than version 1.0, this is probably the biggest Nim release yet and we're very excited to release it!
```

It contains exactly 900 new commits which have not already been backported to our previous versions.
There are several new features and standard library additions compared to 1.2.
We tried to keep breaking changes to a minimum, but some bugfixes weren't possible
without making those necessary changes, and we feel that our users will benefit
from them.

We would recommend to all of our users to upgrade and use version 1.4.

# Installing Nim 1.4

## New users

Check out if the package manager of your OS already ships version 1.4 or
install it as described [here](https://nim-lang.org/install.html).

## Existing users

If you have installed a previous version of Nim using `choosenim`,
getting Nim 1.4 is as easy as:

```bash
$ choosenim update stable
```

If you don't have `choosenim`, you can follow the same
[install link](https://nim-lang.org/install.html) as above.

# Contributors to v1.4

> Our contributors are amazing, and there is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Our contributors are amazing, and there are
```

[far too many](https://github.com/nim-lang/Nim/graphs/contributors?from=2020-04-03&to=2020-10-16&type=c)
to list here.
Big thanks to all of you, we couldn't have pulled off this release without you!

# New features

## GC: ORC

A new reference counting algorithm called ARC was first shipped with Nim 1.2.
If you haven't watched it already, we recommend
[this video from FOSDEM](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yA32Wxl59wo)

> where Araq explains details behind ARC and shows some benchmarks which show
> the benefits of it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
where Araq explains details behind ARC and shows some benchmarks that
illustrate the benefits.
```

As far as we know, ARC works with the complete standard library except for

> the current implementation of `async`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the current implementation of `async`, because that introduces cycles that
ARC doesn't deal with.
```

ARC doesn't deal with.
There are other `async` implementations in development that don't introduce cycles.

ORC is the existing ARC algorithm plus a cycle collector, and `--gc:orc` is our

> main new feature for this release!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
main new feature for this release! In the future, we plan for ORC to be Nim's
default memory management strategy.
```
Or something similar. I think this helps answer "why does this even matter?"

Author: This was in the original version, but we decided to remove it on purpose.

Reviewer: In case it doesn't end up happening like that?

[this introductory ARC/ORC post](https://nim-lang.org/blog/2020/10/15/introduction-to-arc-orc-in-nim.html)
to get an idea about ARC/ORC's advantages.

### How to use ARC and ORC

If you haven't used ARC already with Nim 1.2, all you have to do is to pass `--gc:arc`
on the command line:
```nim
nim c -d:release --gc:arc myprogram.nim
```

For the majority of programs this is all it takes.

If your code uses cyclic data structures, or if you're not sure if your code
produces cycles, you need to use `--gc:orc` and not `--gc:arc`.

If you have an object that looks cyclic, but you *know* it isn't, you can help ORC by
marking it as `{.acyclic.}` in the following way:
```nim
type
  Node {.acyclic.} = ref object
    left, right: Node
    data: string
```

To read more about `{.acyclic.}` pragma, please
[check out the manual](https://nim-lang.github.io/Nim/manual.html#pragmas-acyclic-pragma).

### Known incompatibilities and gotchas

#### Deepcopy

If you use `system.deepCopy` in your code, you need to enable it via
`--deepCopy:on` on the command line.
This is a band-aid and a better solution for this will arrive in the future.

> The reason for this opt-in switch is that ARC and ORC do not use the old runtime
> type information (RTTI), whereas `system.deepCopy` is built upon the old RTTI.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The reason for this opt-in switch is that ARC and ORC do not use the old runtime
type information (RTTI) that `system.deepCopy` is built upon.
```

  var x: CustomObject

proc finalizer(x: CustomObject) =
  if x.p != nil:
    dealloc(x.p)

proc newCustomObject(): CustomObject =
  new(result, finalizer)
```

This produces the following error message:
```
temp.nim(15, 6) Error: cannot bind another '=destroy' to: CustomObject:ObjectType;
previous declaration was constructed here implicitly: temp.nim(8, 7)
```

The reason is that only after the `new(result, finalizer)` call the compiler knows
that it needs to generate a custom destructor for the `CustomObject` type,
but when it compiled `tricky` the default destructor was used.

The solution is to move the proc `tricky` after the `newCustomObject` declaration:
```nim
type
  CustomObject = ref object
    p: ptr int

proc finalizer(x: CustomObject) =
  if x.p != nil:
    dealloc(x.p)

proc newCustomObject(): CustomObject =
  new(result, finalizer)

proc tricky() =
  # uses the custom destructor
  var x: CustomObject
```

This is a current limitation that will be improved in future versions of the compiler.

## Strict(er) functions

This is an experimental feature available via `{.experimental: "strictFuncs".}` pragma in
your code or via the `--experimental:strictFuncs` switch.

> It introduces a stricter definition of what "side effect" is:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It introduces a stricter definition of a "side effect":
```

It introduces a stricter definition of a "side effect":
If an object is reachable via a parameter that is not declared as a `var` parameter,
any mutation to that object counts as a side effect.

Here is an example from
[the experimental manual](https://nim-lang.github.io/Nim/manual_experimental.html#strict-funcs):

```nim
{.experimental: "strictFuncs".}

type
  Node = ref object
    le, ri: Node
    data: string

func len(n: Node): int =
  # valid: len does not have side effects
  var it = n
  while it != nil:
    inc result
    it = it.ri

func mut(n: Node) =
  let m = n # is the statement that connected the mutation to the parameter
  m.data = "yeah" # the mutation is here
  # Error: 'mut' can have side effects
  # an object reachable from 'n' is potentially mutated
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more details, please see [Araq's blog post](https://nim-lang.org/blog/2020/09/01/write-tracking.html).

```
Or something similar.

The experimental manual doesn't really give much background information, and we linked to @Yardanico's post about ARC/ORC so I think it makes sense to mention the "write tracking (part 2)" post here.
